Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) enables offloading computation to untrusted
servers with cryptographic privacy. Despite its attractive security, FHE is not
yet widely~adopted due to its prohibitive overheads, about 10,000$\times$ over
unencrypted computation.

Hardware acceleration is an attractive approach to bridge this performance gap,
but it brings new challenges. These include operations on large vectors with
complex dependencies that current vector processor architectures cannot handle,
as well as extreme memory bandwidth demands. This thesis presents two FHE
accelerators that address these challenges: F1 and CraterLake.

F1 is the first \emph{programmable} FHE accelerator, i.e., capable of executing
full FHE programs. F1 is a wide-vector processor with novel functional units
deeply specialized to FHE primitives. This organization provides so much compute
throughput that data movement becomes the key bottleneck. Thus, F1 is primarily
designed to minimize data movement. It speeds up shallow FHE computations
(i.e., those of limited multiplicative depth) by gmean 5,400$\times$ over a
4-core CPU. Unfortunately, F1 becomes memory bandwidth bound on deeper
computations (e.g., deep neural networks). This is because deep FHE programs
require very large ciphertexts (tens of MBs each) and different algorithms that
F1 does not support well.

CraterLake addresses these shortcomings and is the first accelerator to
effectively speed up arbitrarily large FHE programs.  CraterLake introduces a
new hardware architecture that efficiently scales to very~large ciphertexts,
novel functional units to accelerate key kernels, and new algorithms and
compiler techniques to reduce data movement. These advances help CraterLake
outperform a 32-core CPU by gmean 4,600$\times$ and deliver 11.2$\times$ the
performance of F1 on deep benchmarks, even when we scale F1's architecture to
the size of CraterLake.

