\section{Functional Units}
\label{sec:FUs}

In this section, we describe F1's novel functional units. These include the
first vectorized automorphism unit (\autoref{sec:automorphism}), the first
fully-pipelined flexible NTT unit (\autoref{sec:fourStepNTT}), and a new
simplified modular multiplier adapted to FHE (\autoref{sec:modMult}).

\subsection{Automorphism unit}\label{sec:automorphism}

\figFOneAutomorphism

Because F1 uses $E$ vector lanes, each residue polynomial is stored and
processed as $G$ groups, or \emph{chunks}, of $E$ elements each ($N=G\cdot E$).
An automorphism $\sigma_k$ maps the element at index $i$ to index $ki \textrm{
mod } N$; there are $N$ automorphisms total, two for each odd $k < N$
(\autoref{sec:fhe_operation}). The key challenge in designing an automorphism
unit is that these permutations are hard to vectorize: we would like this unit
to consume and produce $E=$128 elements/cycle, but the vectors are much longer,
with $N$ up to 16\,K, and elements are permuted across different chunks.
Moreover, we must support variable $N$ \emph{and} all automorphisms.

Standard solutions fail: a 16\,K$\times$16\,K crossbar is much too large; a
scalar approach, like reading elements in sequence from an SRAM, is too slow
(taking $N$ cycles); and using banks of SRAM to increase throughput runs into
frequent bank conflicts: each automorphism ``spreads''~elements with a
different stride, so regardless of the banking scheme, some automorphisms will
map many consecutive elements to the~same~bank.

We contribute a new insight that makes vectorizing automorphisms simple: if we
interpret a residue polynomial as a $G \times E$ matrix, an automorphism can
always be decomposed into two independent \emph{column} and \emph{row
permutations}. If we transpose this matrix, both column and row permutations
can be applied \emph{in chunks of $E$ elements}. \autoref{fig:f1automorphism}
shows an example of how automorphism $\sigma_3$ is applied to a residue
polynomial with $N=16$ and $E=4$ elements/cycle. Note how the permute column
and row operations are local to each $4$-element chunk. Other $\sigma_k$ induce
different permutations, but with the same row/column structure.

\figFOneautfu

Our automorphism unit, shown in \autoref{fig:f1aut_fu}, uses this insight to be
both vectorized (consuming $E=128$ elements/cycle) and fully pipelined. Given a
residue polynomial of $N=G\cdot E$ elements, the automorphism unit first
applies the column permutation to each $E$-element input. Then, it feeds this
to a \emph{transpose unit} that reads in the whole residue polynomial
interpreting it as a $G\times E$ matrix, and produces its transpose $E\times
G$. The transpose unit outputs $E$ elements per cycle (outputting multiple rows
per cycle when $G < E$). Row permutations are applied to each $E$-element
chunk, and the reverse transpose is applied.

Further, we decompose both the row and column permutations into a pipeline of
sub-permutations that are \textit{fixed in hardware}, with each sub-permutation
either applied or bypassed based on simple control logic; this avoids using
crossbars for the $E$-element permute row and column operations.

\figFOneQuadrantSwap

\paragraph{Transpose unit:}
Our \textit{quadrant-swap transpose} unit transposes an $E \times E$ (e.g.,
$128\times 128$) matrix by recursively decomposing it into quadrants and
exploiting the identity

\begin{equation*}
  \left[ \begin{array}{c|c}
      \texttt{A} & \texttt{B}\\
      \hline
      \texttt{C} & \texttt{D}
  \end{array}\right]^{\textrm{T}} =   \left[ \begin{array}{c|c}
      \texttt{A}^{\textrm{T}} & \texttt{C}^{\textrm{T}} \\
      \hline
      \texttt{B}^{\textrm{T}} & \texttt{D}^{\textrm{T}}
  \end{array}\right].
\end{equation*}

The basic building block is a $K \times K$ \textit{quadrant-swap} unit, which
swaps quadrants \texttt{B} and \texttt{C}, as shown in
\autoref{fig:f1quadrantSwap}(left). Operationally, the quadrant swap procedure
consists of three steps, each taking $K/2$ cycles:
\begin{compactenum}
\item Cycle \texttt{i} in the first step reads \texttt{A[i]} and \texttt{C[i]}
    and stores them in \texttt{top[i]} and \texttt{bottom[i]}, respectively.
\item Cycle \texttt{i} in the second step reads \texttt{B[i]} and
    \texttt{D[i]}. The unit activates the first swap MUX and the bypass line,
    thus storing \texttt{D[i]} in \texttt{top[i]} and outputing \texttt{A[i]}
    (by reading from \texttt{top[i]}) and \texttt{B[i]} via the bypass line.
\item Cycle \texttt{i} in the third step outputs \texttt{D[i]} and
    \texttt{C[i]} by reading from \texttt{top[i]} and \texttt{bottom[i]},
    respectively. The second swap MUX is activated so that \texttt{C[i]} is on
    top.
\end{compactenum}

Note that step $3$ for one input can be done in parallel with step $1$ for the
next, so the unit is \emph{fully pipelined}.

The transpose is implemented by a full $E \times E$ quadrant-swap followed by
$\log_2E$ layers of smaller transpose units to recursively transpose
\texttt{A}, \texttt{B}, \texttt{C}, and \texttt{D}.
\autoref{fig:f1quadrantSwap} (right) shows an implementation for $E=8$.
Finally, by selectively bypassing some of the initial quadrant swaps, this
transpose unit also works for all values of $N$ ($N=G\times E$ with power-of-2
$G < E$).

Prior work has implemented transpose units for signal-processing applications,
either using registers~\cite{wang2018pipelined,zhang2020novel} or with custom
SRAM designs~\cite{shang2014single}. Our design has three advantages over prior
work: it uses standard SRAM memory, so it is dense without requiring complex
custom SRAMs; it is fully pipelined; and it works for a wide range of
dimensions.

\subsection{Four-step NTT unit}\label{sec:fourStepNTT}

There are many ways to implement NTTs in hardware: an NTT is like an
FFT~\cite{cooley:moc65:algorithm} but with a butterfly that uses modular
multipliers. We implement $N$-element NTTs (from 1K to 16K) as a composition of
smaller $E$=128-element NTTs, since implementing a full 16K-element NTT
datapath is prohibitive. The challenge is that standard approaches result in
memory access patterns that are hard to vectorize.

\figFOneFourStepNTT

To that end, we use the \textit{four-step variant} of the FFT
algorithm~\cite{bailey:supercomputing89:FFTs}, which adds an extra
multiplication to produce a vector-friendly decomposition.
\autoref{fig:f1fourStepNTT} illustrates our four-step NTT pipeline for $E=4$;
we use the same structure with $E=128$. The unit is fully pipelined and
consumes $E$ elements per cycle. To compute an $N=E\times E$ NTT, the unit
first computes an $E$-point NTT on each $E$-element group, multiplies each
group with twiddles, transposes the $E$ groups, and computes another
$E$-element NTT on each transpose. The same NTT unit implements the inverse NTT
by storing multiplicative factors (\textit{twiddles}) required for both forward
and inverse NTTs in a small \textit{twiddle SRAM}.

Crucially, we are able to support all values of $N$ using a single four-step
NTT pipeline by conditionally bypassing layers in the second NTT butterfly. We
use the same transpose unit implementation as with automorphisms.

Our four-step pipeline supports negacyclic NTTs (NCNs), which are more
efficient than standard non-negacyclic NTTs (that would require padding,
\autoref{sec:algoInsights}). Specifically, we extend prior
work~\cite{poppelmann2015high,roy2014compact,lyubashevsky:tact10:ideal} in
order to support \emph{both} forward and inverse NCNs using the same hardware
as for the standard NTT. Namely, prior work shows how to either \emph{(1)}
perform a forward NCN via a standard decimation-in-time (DIT) NTT pipeline, or
\emph{(2)} perform an inverse NCN via a standard decimation-in-frequency (DIF)
NTT pipeline. The DIF and DIT NTT variants use different hardware; therefore,
this approach requires separate pipelines for forward and inverse NCNs. Prior
work~\cite{lyubashevsky:tact10:ideal} has shown that separate pipelines can be
avoided by adding a multiplier either before or after the NTT: doing an
\emph{inverse} NCN using a \emph{DIT} NTT requires a multiplier unit
\emph{after} the NTT, while doing a \emph{forward} NCN using a \emph{DIF} NTT
requires a multiplier unit \emph{before} the NTT.

We now show that \emph{both} the forward and inverse NCN can be done in the
same standard four-step NTT pipeline, with \emph{no additional hardware}. This
is because the four-step NTT already has a multiplier and two NTTs in its
pipeline. We set the first NTT to be decimation-in-time and the second to be
decimation-in-frequency (\autoref{fig:f1fourStepNTT}). To do a forward NTT, we
use the forward NCN implementation via DIT NTT for the first NTT; we modify the
contents of the Twiddle SRAM so that the multiplier does the pre-multiplication
necessary to implement a forward NCN in the second NTT (which is DIF and thus
requires the pre-multiplication). Conversely, to do an inverse NTT, we modify
the Twiddle SRAM contents to do the post\hyp{}mul\-ti\-pli\-ca\-tion necessary
to implement an inverse NCN in the first NTT (which is DIT); and we use the
inverse NCN imple\-men\-ta\-tion via DIF NTT for the second NTT.

The NTT unit is large: each of the 128-element NTTs requires $E(\log
(E)-1)/2$=384 multipliers, and the full unit uses 1024 multipliers. But its
high throughput improves performance over many low-throughput NTTs
(\autoref{sec:evaluation}). This is the first implementation of a
fully-pipelined four-step NTT unit, improving NTT performance by 1,600$\times$
over the state of the art (\autoref{sec:perf}).


\subsection{Optimized modular multiplier}\label{sec:modMult}
\tblFOneModMult

Modular multiplication computes $a\cdot b \textrm{ mod } q$. This is the most
expensive and frequent operation. Therefore, improvements to the modular
multiplier have an almost linear impact on the computational capabilities of an
FHE accelerator.

Prior work~\cite{mert:euromicro19:design} recognized that a Montgomery
multiplier~\cite{montgomery:mom85:modular} within NTTs can be improved by
leveraging the fact that the possible values of modulus $q$ are restricted by
the number of elements the NTT is applied to. We notice that if we only select
moduli $q_i$, such that $q_i = -1 \textrm{ mod } 2^{16}$, we can remove a
mutliplier stage from~\cite{mert:euromicro19:design}; this reduces area by 19\%
and power by 30\% (\autoref{tbl:f1modMult}). The additional restriction on $q$
is acceptable because FHE requires at most 10s of
moduli~\cite{gentry:crypto2012:homomorphic}, and our approach allows for
6,186~prime~moduli.
