Thank you to all the people that create environments in which success is easy
and fun. Your work matters and changes lives.

This work was conducted in collaboration with Axel Feldmann, Aleksandar
Krastev, Nicholas Genise, Prof. Srini Devadas, Karim Eldefrawy, Nathan Manohar,
Prof. Ron Dreslinski, Prof. Chris Peikert, and my research advisor Prof. Daniel
Sanchez. Much of this thesis is adapted from joinly written papers. This work
would not have been possible without all of their contributions.

I am especially grateful to my advisor, Prof. Daniel Sanchez. Daniel's
commitment to mentorship is what I hoped to find when I first came to the
United States as an undergraduate. I am thankful to him for helping this
country live up to its hype.

Axel Feldmann, my research partner on the work in this thesis, has become a
great friend during the last two years. I learned a lot from Axel, from the
technical to the mundane. Working with him made me a better engineer and
researcher. But most importantly, he always finds a way of making the hard
times a bit easier.

Aleksandar Krastev, an undergraduate student on the project, has contributed
critical components to this work. His engineering and research abilities
clearly surpass my own. I am very grateful to work with him and have him as a
friend.

I would also like to thank the members of my resereach group: Fares Elsabbagh,
Guowei Zhang, Hyun Ryong Lee, Robert Durfee, Nithya Attaluri, Maleen Abeydeera,
Quan Nguyen, Shabnam Sheikhha, Victor Ying, and Yifan Yang. Being around you is
one of the best parts of graduate school. The help I got from the senior
students when starting out was especially critical to bootstrapping my
research career.

I thank Prof. Jason Cong at UCLA for encouraging me to try out research,
mentoring and investing in me, and convincing me that I am capable of doing far
more than I knew I could.

I thank Ellen and Rica Rodman, as well as Spyridon Michalakis for jumpstarting
my career and believing in me very early on. I am especially greatful for
receiving the Norton Rodman scholarship that Rica established in her Father's
name.

I thank my teachers in the Mathematical Grammar School in Belgrade for being
the best in the world at what they do. This thesis would not exist without
them. And thank you to the School for connecting me with caring and supportive
friends for life.

I thank my Dad and Stepmom for their love, getting me interested in programming
from an early age and, most importantly, for giving me my beloved brother.

Most of all, I thank my Mom, whose selflessness and love make it hard for me to
finish this sentence without tearing up.
